# Finding scenius

_Rough working notes on scenius._

The artist Brian Eno has
[defined](http://www.kk.org/thetechnium/archives/2008/06/scenius_or_comm.php)
a notion of "scenius": 

"Scenius stands for the intelligence and the intuition of a whole
cultural scene. It is the communal form of the concept of the genius."

It's not difficult to think of examples of scenius.  

Florence in the 15th century had approximately 100,000 inhabitants.
The people born in (or just outside) Florence in that time include
Michaelangelo, Botticelli, Masaccio, Fra Angelico, Donatello, and a
host of lesser but still great painters.

How great a clustering of painters was this?

Numerical attempts to quantify the value of creative work are always
arguable, and I don't want to get caught up in arguing over details.
However, let us conservatively grant that several of these painters
could reasonably be listed among the 100 greatest painters of all
time.  For example, four of them appear on
[this list](http://www.theartwolf.com/articles/most-important-painters.htm).
A modern country of, say, 100 million inhabitants, might, if it were
lucky, produce more than four painters of such quality during a
century.  But it is almost inconceivable that it would produce (say)
40 such painters.

In other words, if you were an artist who aspired to be considered a
great painter, you upped your chances by a factor of perhaps a
thousand by the good fortune of being born in Florence in the 15th
century, rather than (say) in North American in the 20th century.

**Scenius is causative:** An interesting contrast to Florence is the
small town of Los Alamos during World War II.  Living in the town were
scientific luminaries such Feynman, Fermi, Bethe, and (on occasion)
Bohr and von Neumann.

This is a galaxy of talent not unlike Florence in the 15th century.
But, of course, the environment in Los Alamos did not _create_ such
talent.  Most of the luminaries in town were already exceptionally
accomplished _before_ going to Los Alamos.  Perhaps the environment
did make some positive difference to their future accomplishments, but
it seems unlikely that it was primarily the environment which caused
their future accomplishments.

By contrast, the great painters of Florence named above were all born
in Florence, or in the countryside nearby.  And so it really was
living in Florence during the 15th century which helped _cause_ these
people to become much better painters.
  
**Two hypotheses:** Let me set up two hypotheses about how works of
  great distinction are produced.  One is the _genius hypothesis_.
  This is the idea that what makes someone like Michaelangelo great is
  some intrinsic quality of that person.  According to this
  hypothesis, he could have been brought up in another small town of
  100,000 and, provided that town had any sort of artistic community,
  he still would have matured into a great artist.  The other is the
  _scenius hypothesis_, which states that while intrinsic properties
  are important, the environment in which an artist works may be even
  more important.
  
**Scenius is not merely a statistical fluke:** Suppose you believe the
genius hypothesis.  You might wonder whether Florence was, perhaps,
just a statistical fluke?  After all, under the genius hypothesis some
otherwise unremarkable communities will contain an excess of good
artists, just by the luck of the draw.  This is true.  However, in the
appendix I set up a simple statistical model to test the idea.  And
what we find is that Florence is far far beyond what can be accounted
for, even by the luck of the draw.
      
**Wasn't it just that Florence was the right place at the right
  time?** In this explanation, we say that a few things came together:
  (1) the ideas, techniques and technologies of art had advanced to a
  point where it opened up a whole new world of artistic
  possibilities; (2) Florence already had a community of artists who
  were already on the leading edge (true); and (3) the success of the
  Medici and other families created a business model to support
  artistic endeavours.

These observations suggest many questions.  But I think they suggest
one thing in particular, for the ambitious: **if you want to improve
your chances of doing great things, then find scenius**. What else
increases your chance of doing great things by a factor of 1,000 or
more?  

The question then becomes: **how to find scenius?** And to answer
that, the we can ask **Where is scenius today?** Let's look first at
the related question: **what are some examples of scenius in recent
times?** Here's a few that seem like likely candidates:
  
+ In the 1970s
  [Xerox PARC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PARC_(company)) made
  crucial contributions to the development of laser printers, the
  mouse, windowing systems (and graphics more generally), the
  ethernet, and many more.

+ Pixar: 11 of Pixar's 12 feature films have been critical and
financial successes.  For the most part they're not to my taste, but
clearly Pixar has figured out something which virtually none of the
other studios have.

**What's going to be important in 10-15 years' time? Are there
  high-concentration communities doing interesting work in the area
  today?** Space, robotics, 
  
**The problems of high-prestige, fashionable, or rich fields:** My
empirical observation is that the density of stimulating people to
learn from in these fields is often low.  A possible reason is that
these are fields in which it is relatively easy to do well, and so
attractive to lots of people who want to coast.  When money is pouring
into a field, so will people who just want to take the easy way.  The
counterpoint to this argument is that lots of very smart, very
determined people will also be in these fields.

**A corollary to the above is to look for communities that are held
 together by something other than fashion, money, or prestige:**
 Often, they'll be held together by a shared ideal, or something else
 that is shared.  Is what is shared awareness of a frontier?  Do the
 people in it

**Is there a rich frontier to mine?** Think of painting at the end of
  the 15th century.  Painting at the start of the 20th.  Quantum
  computing in the early 1990s.  Physics in the 1920s.  The internet
  (especially the web) in the 1990s.  Possibly also today.  In each
  case there were major frontiers on which it had become possible to
  make rapid progress.
  
**Phil Agre:** Agre has pointed out (somewhere, I haven't tracked down
  the location) that an excellent way to identify emerging fields is
  to ask smart undergraduates what they're interested in, and then to
  eliminate the already-fashionable answers.  In what remaisn

**Appendix: was Florence a statistical fluke?** Suppose we regard the
  genius hypothesis as true, and believe that someone will achieve
  greatness as a painter with a fixed probability, say p = 1 in ten
  million, independent of their environment.  Then in a community of n
  = 100,000 people, the probability of having k or more great painters
  (k a small positive integer) is approximately:
  
  (np)^k / k! = (1/100)^k / k!
  
  When k = 4, this probability is less than one in a billion.  And so
  if the genius hypothesis is true, then Florence is far outside the
  bounds of what can be expected statistically.
  
  Of course, the outcome here depends a lot on exactly what we mean by
  "great".  Another way of saying how small p is, relative to
    
  
  Of course, the outcome here depends a lot on how exactly you choose
  the value for p to correspond to greatness.  Choose



ZZZ





**But how to recognize scenius?**


**What about the founder effect?**



**Is Google an example of scenius?** Maybe there are places inside
  Google where that's true.

**What isn't scenius?** If something is fashionable or there's lots of
  money to do it (or both).  This causes an inrush of poseurs and
  9-to-5ers.  Consider, by contrast, the case of Camp 4 at Yosemite.
  Climbers at Camp 4 will make a living . They'll live off boiled rice
  and peanut butter.
  

**It doesn't come out of companies:** I do wonder . Many of
  Michaelangelo's greatest works were, of course, produced on
  commission.
